dakṣo viriñcatanayo'tha manostanūjāṃ
labdhvā prasūtimiha ṣoḍaśa cāpa kanyā: |
dharme trayodaśa dadau pitṛṣu svadhāṃ ca
svāhāṃ havirbhuji satīṃ giriśe tvadaṃśe ||1||
dakṣa: viriñca-tanaya: atha	Daksha, the son of Brahmaa, then
mano:-tanūjām labdhvā prasūtim-	getting Manu's daughter Prasooti, in marriage
iha	through her
ṣoḍaśa ca-āpa kanyā:	begot sixteen daughters
dharme trayodaśa dadau	to Dharma he gave thirteen
pitṛṣu svadhāṃ ca	(he gave) Swadhaa to the Pitris
svāhāṃ havirbhuji	(and) Swahaa to Agni
satīṃ giriśe tvat-aṃśe	Sati (he gave to) Shiva, who is an aspect of Thyself
Daksha Prajaapati, the son of Brahmaa married Prasooti, the daughter of Manu and begot sixteen daughters off her. He gave thirteen of them to Dharmaa deva, Swadhaa to the Pitris, Swaahaa to Agni and Sati to Shiva who is an aspect of Thyself.
mūrtirhi dharmagṛhiṇī suṣuve bhavantaṃ
nārāyaṇaṃ narasakhaṃ mahitānubhāvam |
yajjanmani pramuditā: kṛtatūryaghoṣā:
puṣpotkarān pravavṛṣurnunuvu: suraughā: ||2||
mūrti:-hi dharma-gṛhiṇī	Murti the wife of Dharmadeva
suṣuve bhavantaṃ nārāyaṇaṃ	gave birth to Thee as Naaraayana
narasakhaṃ mahita-anubhāvaṃ	along with Nara of great glory
yat-janmani	at whose birth
pramuditā:	extremely delighted
kṛta-tūrya-ghoṣā:	sounding musical instruments
puṣpa-utkarān pravavṛṣu:-	(and) showering heaps of celestial flowers
nunuvu: suraughā:	that host of Devas sang hymns in Thy praise
Murti the wife of Dharmadeva gave birth to Thee as her most glorious son Naaraayana, along with Nara as inseparable companion. The gods in the heavens rejoiced at this birth, they sang hymns in Thy praise, in accompaniment of musical instruments, and showered heaps of flowers.
daityaṃ sahasrakavacaṃ kavacai: parītaṃ
sāhasravatsaratapassamarābhilavyai: |
paryāyanirmitatapassamarau bhavantau
śiṣṭaikakaṅkaṭamamuṃ nyahatāṃ salīlam ||3||
daityam	the Asura
sahasra-kavacam kavacai: parītam	known as Sahasrakavacha, who was covered by a thousand coat of arms
sāhasra-vatsara-tapa:-samara-abhilavyai:	which could be pierced only by penance for one thousand years and fighting for the same duration
paryāya-nirmita-tapa:-samarau	taking turns in doing penance and fighting
bhavantau	Thou two
śiṣṭa-aika-kaṅkaṭam-amum	(one who was) left with only one coat of armour, this Asura
nyahatām	killed effortlessly
salīlam	as a sport
The Asura known as Sahasrakavacha, had one thousand coats of armour. One who did penance for a thousand years and also fought with the Asura for a thousand years, simultaneously, only could pierce the armors. Thou as Naaraayan along with Nara did the required in turns and all the coats of the Asura were destroyed but one remained. Then Thou killed him effortlessly, as a sport.
anvācarannupadiśannapi mokṣadharmaṃ
tvaṃ bhrātṛmān badarikāśramamadhyavātsī: |
śakro'tha te śamatapobalanissahātmā
divyāṅganāparivṛtaṃ prajighāya māram ||4||
anvācaran-	practicing
upadiśan-api	and also preaching
mokṣa-dharmam	the path of liberation
tvaṃ bhrātṛmān	Thou along with Thy brother (Nara)
badarikāśramam-adhyavātsī:	dwelt in Badarikaashrama
śakra:-atha	Indra then
te śama-tapa:-bala-nissaha-ātmā	unable to bear because of jealousy Thy prowess acquired by discipline and penance
divyāṅganā-parivṛtam	surrounded by celestial beauties
prajighāya	sent
māram	cupid
Practicing and teaching the path of disciplines, leading to liberation, Thou with Nara Thy brother, dwelt in Badarikaashrama. Indra who was jealous of Thy spiritual powers, which Thou had acquired by penance and discipline, sent cupid along with celestial beauties to disturb Thee.
kāmo vasantamalayānilabandhuśālī
kāntākaṭākṣaviśikhairvikasadvilāsai: |
vidhyanmuhurmuhurakampamudīkṣya ca tvāṃ
bhīrustvayā'tha jagade mṛduhāsabhājā ||5||
kāma:	Cupid
vasanta-malaya-anila	with Vasant (spring) and Malaya breeze
bandhuśālī	as his friends (associates)
kāntā-kaṭākṣa-viśikhai:-	with the arrows in the sidelong glances of the damsels
vikasat-vilāsai:	and amorous movements
vidhyan-muhu:-muhu:-	piercing again and again
akampam-udīkṣya ca tvām	and seeing Thee unwavered
bhīru:-	(were) frightened
tvayā-atha jagade	then, were told by Thee
mṛdu-hāsa-bhājā	(Thee) who were smiling
Cupid accompanied by spring season and the Malaya breeze, tried to attack Thee many times by the arrows consisting of the damsels' sidelong glances and their amorous movements. Finding Thee unaffected, they were frightened. Thou then smilingly spoke to them.
bhītyā'lamaṅgaja vasanta surāṅganā vo
manmānasaṃ tviha juṣadhvamiti bruvāṇa: |
tvaṃ vismayena parita: stuvatāmathaiṣāṃ
prādarśaya: svaparicārakakātarākṣī: ||6||
bhītyā-alam-	do not fear
aṅgaja vasanta surāṅganā va:	you (all) Cupid, Spring, damsels
mat-mānasam tu-iha	here, however, (you all) product of my mind
juṣadhvam-	enjoy
iti bruvāṇa:	thus saying
tvaṃ	Thou (showed)
vismayena parita:	(who were) surrounded by wonder (wonder-struck)
stuvatām-atha-aiṣām	who were praising Thee, then to them
prādarśaya:	(Thou) showed
svaparicāraka-kātarākṣī:	the beautiful damsels attending on Thee
Thou told Cupid and others who were standing around Thee struck with wonder, and praising Thee -" O Kaamdeva, Spring and damsels! Do not fear. Look at these products of my mind." So saying Thou revealed to them the beautiful handmaids attending on Thee.
sammohanāya militā madanādayaste
tvaddāsikāparimalai: kila mohamāpu: |
dattāṃ tvayā ca jagṛhustrapayaiva sarva-
svarvāsigarvaśamanīṃ punarurvaśīṃ tām ||7||
sammohanāya	to enchant (Thee)
militā madana-ādaya:-	Cupid and others who had assembled
te	Thee
tvat-dāsikā-parimalai:	by the fragrance of Thy handmaids
kila moham-āpu:	indeed were enchanted
dattāṃ tvayā ca	and given by Thee
jagṛhu:-trapayā-eva	accepted (Urvashi) with shame indeed
sarva-svarvāsi-garva-śamanīṃ	who humbled the pride of all celestial damsels
puna:-urvaśīṃ tām	again that Urvashi
Kaamadeva (Cupid) and others who had come to overpower Thee, were themselves captivated by Thy handmaids' fragrance.Then, they, feeling ashamed, accepted Urvashi, who was given by Thee and who humbled the pride of all the celestial damsels.
dṛṣṭvorvaśīṃ tava kathāṃ ca niśamya śakra:
paryākulo'jani bhavanmahimāvamarśāt |
evaṃ praśāntaramaṇīyatarāvatārā-
ttvatto'dhiko varada kṛṣṇatanustvameva ||8||
dṛṣṭvā-urvaśīṃ	on seeing Urvashee
tava kathāṃ ca niśamya	and hearing Thy story
śakra:	Indra
paryākula:-ajani	became perplexed
bhavat-mahimā-avamarśāt	on realising Thy glory
evaṃ	in this manner
praśānta-ramaṇīyatara-avatārāt	gentle and so beautiful than this incarnation (avataara)
ttvatta:-	of Thee
adhika:	greater (surpassing)
varada	O Bestower of boons!
kṛṣṇatanu:-tvam-eva	is Thy incarnation as Krishna, only
Seeing Urvashi and hearing about Thy achievements, Indra was perplexed, and thus realized Thy glory. O Bestower of Boons! This incarnation of Thee as Nara Naaraayana which is so gentle and beautiful, is excelled only by Thy incarnation as Krishna.
dakṣastu dhāturatilālanayā rajo'ndho
nātyādṛtastvayi ca kaṣṭamaśāntirāsīt |
yena vyarundha sa bhavattanumeva śarvaṃ
yajñe ca vairapiśune svasutāṃ vyamānīt ||9||
dakṣa:-tu	Daksha, indeed
dhātu:-ati-lālanayā	due to excessive indulgence shown by Brahmaa
raja:-andha:	blinded by Rajoguna (haughtiness)
na-ati-ādṛta:-tvayi	without much respect for Thee
ca kaṣṭam-	and Alas!
aśānti:-āsīt	was unpeaceful in mind
yena vyarundha sa	because of that he became antagonistic to
bhavat-tanum-eva śarvaṃ	Shiva who is a form of Thee alone
yajñe ca vaira-piśune	and during the Yanjya which he did to show his enmity to Shiva
sva-sutām vyamānīt	insulted his own daughter
Owing to the extreme indulgence given to him by Brahmaa, Daksha was blinded with haughtiness and overpowered by Rajoguna. Alas! He had no respect for Thee and had lost his mental calmness. So he became antagonistic to Shiva who is Thee alone in another form. He performed a sacrifice to show his enmity towards Shiva and also slighted his own daughter Sati.
kruddheśamarditamakha: sa tu kṛttaśīrṣo
devaprasāditaharādatha labdhajīva: |
tvatpūritakratuvara: punarāpa śāntiṃ
sa tvaṃ praśāntikara pāhi marutpureśa ||10||
kruddha-īśa-mardita-makha:	enraged, Shiva disrupted the Yanjya
sa tu kṛtta-śīrṣa:	and that Daksha was beheaded
deva-prasādita-harāt-atha	from Shiva who was propitiated by the gods, then,
labdha-jīva:	was restored to life
tvat-pūrita-kratuvara:	whose Yanjya was completed by Thy grace
puna:-āpa śāntiṃ	(he) regained peace of mind
sa tvaṃ praśāntikara	That Thou O Bestower of calmness!
pāhi marutpureśa	protect O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Enraged, Shiva disrupted the sacrifice of Daksha and also cut off his head. However on being propitiated by the gods, Shiva restored Daksha to life again. His sacrifice was then completed by Thy grace, and he also achieved mental peace. O Lord of Guruvaayur! O Bestower of calmness! deign to protect me.